all right so
last time we proved the following
theorem
that if i have a convergent series
and this implies that
the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub
n
equals zero
so a natural question is
you know as a
beginning
advanced math class
does the converse hold is this a two-way
street or a one-way street so um
if the individual terms in this series
converges to zero does this imply
that the series converges
so
um and i'm sure you
answered this question in some form in a
previous calculus class
and the answer to this question is no
so
um
what's the counter example it's the so
so-called harmonic series
which corresponds to kind of our
favorite
sequence which converges to zero
so we'll state this as a theorem
the series sum from n equals one to
infinity of one over n
does not
converge
okay
so how
how are we going to prove this theorem
we'll prove this theorem by showing
a sequence of partial sums a subsequence
of partial sums for this guy does not
converge okay so if it were to converge
then every then the sequence of partial
sums converges and therefore every
subsequence of partial sums converge
okay so what's the uh
what's the strategy we're going to show
that there exists a subsequence
of partial sums
so here
snk
let's make this
mk so remember the partial sums
are simply summing up the first
uh
so the index here is m sub k so the
first m sub k terms
one over n
diverges okay so and this is enough to
show that the full series doesn't
converge again because if it did
converge
the partial sums the sequence of partial
sums converges and therefore every
subsequence of partial sums converges so
if we're able to show there exists a
subsequence which diverges
then we're done in fact what we're going
to do is something a little bit stronger
we're going to show that there exists a
subsequence
of partial sums which not only diverges
but is unbounded and therefore the
entire sequence of partial sums is
unbounded
okay
so if we're able to show there exists a
subsequence which is unbounded then the
entire sequence of partial sums is
unbounded so it can't converge because
remember convergent sequences imply
bounded sequences
okay
so we're going to look at uh
when m sub k is dyadic
okay
so
um
and for some reason i switched indices
from k to l in my notes so instead we're
going to go from
m sub l
okay
so let l be a natural number
and we'll consider
the
partial sum corresponding to adding up
the first two to the l terms
okay
now you may ask why 2 to the l why not 3
to the l 4 well 4 to the l will be a
subsequence of that but
um
2 to the l is is you could do 3 to the l
you could do 5 to the l but 2 to the l
seems uh
is
sufficient for our purposes
so what we're going to do is we're going
to take
this partial sum
and
bound it from below by something which
is quite large so first off all of these
uh partial sums are bounded from below
by zero right there they're a sum of
non-negative terms
so we write
s 2 to the l this is equal to
1 plus
a half plus
and i'm going to put parentheses around
that plus a third plus a fourth plus
a fifth plus
six plus
a seventh plus an eighth so how i'm
grouping these terms is
i'm grouping them according to
whether the denominator falls between
um
you know a power of two and the next
power of two
okay
and then
plus
so
dot dot dot
2 to the l minus 1 plus 1 plus
1 over
2 to the l
okay
now i can write this partial sum
all right so i've grouped terms this way
what is this
uh in terms of um precise
symbols this is one plus
sum from
lambda equals one to l
sum from n equals two to the lambda
minus one plus one
two to the lambda
one over n
so these
lambdas are now
parameterizing whether uh what power of
two i'm at so when lambda equals one i'm
at this block
when lambda equals 2 i'm at this block
and lambda equals l i'm at this block
okay
and then i'm summing up the terms that
have denominator
between that power and the next of two
okay
all right so i have this
[Applause]
and now
i bound that sum from
below
because again i'm trying to show that
uh this sequence of
the subsequence of partial sums is
unbounded
so i bound it from below
by
sum from
lambda equals
1 to l
sum from n equals
2 to the
lambda minus 1 plus 1
lambda
and now for each of these n is between
2 to the
so this should be
2 to the lambda
now for n between these two numbers n is
one over n is always bigger than or
equal to when i plug in the biggest
bound here two to the lambda
okay
and now so now i just have a sum
so over n but there's no n in this term
so i just
add up
all the the number of terms in a given
block and this is equal to so first i
have 1 over 2 to the lambda coming from
here
and then
sum from n equals 2 to the lambda minus
1 plus 1 2 to the lambda times 1. so
again i'm kind of going a little slow
here
and this is just equal to
l 1 over
2 to the lambda times
the number of terms i have here which is
2 to the lambda minus
2 to the lambda minus 1 plus 1
so this minus this
plus 1.
okay
so this is equal to one plus
lambda equals one to l
one over two lambda and then so this one
cancels with this one
and then i have two to the lambda minus
one which i can bring out
and so this is just one
okay and i get
one plus sum from
lambda equals one to l
and this two to the lambda cancels with
this two to the lambda and i'm left with
just a half
okay
and this is big and this is equal to
now remember there's no sum here and
lambda
so uh this is just
one plus
l over 2.
okay
so
what did we do we basically
showed that each of these blocks is
bounded from below by a half right
that's that's this term that we get
right here in the end
yeah and we can see this uh if we just
kind of go through the first three terms
which i have written here right so
one half is clearly bounded below by a
half
one third plus a fourth is bounded below
by a fourth plus a fourth because a
third is bigger than that so a fourth
plus a fourth is a half
if i look at this next block
that's one over five is bigger than or
equal to one over eight
so is one over six so is one over seven
so
this sum is bigger than or equal to
one-eighth plus one-eighth plus
one-eighth plus one-eighth which equals
a half plus and then so on
so maybe i should have said that before
i went into the actual computation but
in the end we get that this subsequence
of partial sums as to the 2l
so let me just summarize
this is bigger than or equal to
l plus 2 over 2.
okay
and as l goes as l gets very large this
thing gets very large
so this implies s to the 2l
this subsequence
l equals 1 to infinity is
unbounded which implies that
the full
subsequence or the full sequence of
partial sums
is unbounded and therefore the
sequence does not the sequence of
partial sums does not converge and
therefore that series does not converge
okay
all right so
we see that uh
the converse does not hold for
that question or for that theorem
i will just make a very passing mention
um
to the
fact that there are
fields
for which um that does hold so not
ordered fields because again ordered
fields with the least upper bound
property have to be have to be r
and therefore we've just shown that uh
um
the converse of that theorem does not
hold but
um
in fact if you look at the so-called
peatic numbers
um they do have this property that
if the
uh sequence of terms converges to zero
then the series converges but we will
never see periodic numbers i just wanted
to do a little lip service to that
um
to that fact that there are at least
fields of uh numbers that that do have
this property and
okay so
so we had a theorem about uh
limits of sequences and how they
interact with algebraic operations this
naturally implies a theorem about series
so
let alpha be an r
and
some and uh
let's suppose we have two
uh convergent series
then if i look at the series
alpha x n plus y n so the new terms so
the terms of my new series are alpha
times x sub n plus y sub n this is a
convergent series
and
the sum of
this series is equal to
kind of what you expect
so the sum of the series alpha x n plus
y n is equal to alpha times the sum of x
ends plus the sum of y ins
okay
so this theorem follows essentially uh
or kind of immediately from what we did
for sequences
partial sums satisfy
if i look at
some stopping at m
alpha x n
plus y n
now just by the linearity of just adding
up finitely many terms i'm not going to
put something down below
because i really don't need to
this is equal to alpha times
the partial sum of x sub n
plus
the partial sum corresponding to y sub n
okay
and so we're assuming
this uh
sequence of partial sums converges and
this sequence of partial sums converges
so therefore this term on the right hand
side converges which implies the left
side converges so
so by the
linear properties of
limits namely that
the limit of the sum is the sum of the
limits
[Applause]
and multiplication just by
fixed real numbers um
commutes with taking limits we get that
limit as m goes to infinity so
of the partial sum corresponding to the
new series
equals alpha
plus
and that's just alpha times some x in
some
y
okay
and that's the end
all right so
um
now
remember
we had certain um sequences which we
could tell whether they converge kind of
a little bit easier than
um just an arbitrary sequence one
a couple examples of at least one
example of a sequence we could we could
decide if it uh converges
kind of easily is
a monotone increasing sequence
okay and we showed that a monotone
increasing sequence
uh converges if and only if it's bounded
all right
so
we're going to use this to be able to
say
something about sequence about series
now not sequences but series that have
non-negative
terms that i'm adding up okay because
the partial sums corresponding to a
series
that has non-negative terms form
a uh monotone increasing sequence and
that's not too hard to
show so
um
so this is the following theorem
so this is about uh now we're going to
discuss a little bit about
sequences which
or look at sequences which have
non-negative terms so the theorem is the
following
if
we're all in a natural number
xn is bigger than or equal to zero so
all these terms
uh are non-negative
then
the series converges
if
and only if
the sequence of partial sums s sub m
so let's actually uh
is bounded
okay
and again i mean the way we see this is
just that when these terms are
non-negative
um
the sequence of partial sums is monotone
so
here's the proof it's it's quite easy so
have for all n
natural number make that m
if i look at s of n plus 1 this is equal
to so this is the n plus plus 1 partial
sum sum from n equals 1 to n plus 1 x
sub n this is equal to sum from n equals
m x n plus
x
n plus 1.
and now
the x n plus one term is not negative
right we're assuming all the terms are
non-negative so this
right hand side so this is certainly
bigger than or equal to
sum from n equals one to m
of x in and that equals
s sm
okay
so just summarizing
for all
natural numbers m
this m plus 1 is bigger than or equal to
s m
yeah if i just keep adding non-negative
things the partial sums are getting
bigger
all right
so
the partial sums
is a
monotone
so
maybe i should have stated this slightly
differently just so that you don't think
this is part of one of the if and only
is
i mean this is the assumption that we
have uh for this whole statement suppose
um this
so the conclusion is that this converges
if and only if the sequence of partial
sums is bounded okay
so
based on the assumption that all the
terms are non-negative we see that the
sequence of partial sums is monotone
increasing
thus by what we proved for sequences
every monotone increasing sequence
converges if and only if it's bounded
okay and that's it
okay so um
now not every
um series we look at does have
non-negative terms but we can always
form
a certain series from those terms
uh to make
a new non-negative um
a new series with non-negative terms
which gives us information about the
original series
um what am i
going on about
and look at the convergence properties
of that new series so
we have the following definition
that a series converges
absolutely
we say we have absolute convergence
if
the series formed by
taking the absolute values of
these terms
if this series converges
okay
so
what i was trying to get at before i
stated this definition is that
absolute convergence implies
usual convergence
if i had the series converging
absolutely
then
the original series converges
okay
now before i prove this theorem let me
prove a little small theorem i can't
remember if i gave it for an assignment
or not
but it's essentially a triangle
inequality for however many terms you
like
so uh
we'll prove this theorem in just a
minute but first let me
prove the following theorem that
if m is bigger than or equal to 2
and x 1
up to x m
r and
r then
sum from n equals 1 to m
x n take the absolute value of this sum
this is less than or equal to sum from n
equals 1 to m
of the absolute value okay
when
m equals 2 right this is just the usual
form of the triangle inequality so
so when m equals 2 this is just saying
x1 plus x2 is always less than or equal
to x1
plex plus x2
which is just a triangle inequality
okay
but
typically how
life works um
at least an analysis if you can do it
for two things then you can do it for n
things
or m things in this case
um
by induction and so that's how we're
gonna prove this
so we'll prove first prove this triangle
inequality
by induction
so proof
now
in the induction proofs
we've done so far in
little n is our thing that we're
inducting on in this statement m is the
thing
induction on m
okay so let's look at the base case
which is m equals 2
so then
this is just
the triangle inequality
for
two real numbers that we've already
proved before okay x1
plus x2 and absolute value is always
less than or equal to sum of x1 plus the
sum of x2 i means sum of absolute value
of x1 plus and x the absolute value of
x2
so
uh
the base case is fine
so
now we do the inductive step
so i'll assume the statement that i want
to prove
usually i used m but now i'll go to the
next letter l i'm going in reverse
alphabetical order um
suppose
if x1
xl
and r
so let's actually instead of just
restating all that just
call the statement star so suppose
star holds
for m
equals l
and now we want to prove uh that star
holds for m equals l plus one
now we want to show
star holds
for
m equals l plus 1.
[Applause]
okay
so
x one up to x l plus one be an r
then
if i look at the sum sum from
n equals one to
l plus 1
x n
this is equal to
sum from n equals 1 to l
x n plus
x l plus 1 an absolute value
um
by the usual triangle inequality
for two terms this is less than or equal
to
sum from n equals one to l
of x in an absolute value plus
the absolute value of x l plus 1
by
usual
triangle inequality
and now this term since i'm assuming
m equals l uh holds
so
the m equals l case says this is less
than or equal to
sum from n equals one to l
of x n plus
x l plus 1 an absolute value
so this is by
inductive
hypothesis
and this is just equal to
sum from n equals 1 to l plus 1
x n
so we've proven the case for now m
equals l plus one
and that concludes the proof
of this uh generalized triangle
inequality
um
with arbitrary number of terms
all right so let's get back to proving
this theorem that absolute convergence
implies
um
convergence so we'll do that by proving
that absolute convergence implies that
the series is coshy
so
proof and this is of
the theorem just before this theorem we
proved that
absolute convergence implies
usual convergence
so we will prove
that
in fact this series
is koshy assuming that
assuming absolute convergence
and from last time we had
proved the statement or at least this
followed from
the statement for sequences that a koshi
series
converges that
a series is koshi if and only if it
converges
okay so we have to prove that this
series is coshy
remember this means
for all epsilon positive
there exists a natural number m
such that for all
l bigger than m bigger than or equal to
m
[Music]
if i look at the sum from n equals n
plus 1
to l
of x n
this is less than epsilon
okay
so let epsilon be positive
so
since we're assuming that the series is
absolutely convergent
this implies that
the series with absolute values here is
also koshy
so that means
that there exists
natural number m sub zero
such that for all l bigger than m bigger
than or equal to m sub zero
if i look at the sum of
absolute values from n plus 1 to
l
this is less than epsilon now this
should have an absolute value on the
outside but this is the sum of
non-negative terms so the absolute value
can be removed
i mean you can
essentially see where we're going based
on what's written on the board you know
what we want to prove and what we know
and
this triangle inequality right
so
choose m to be m sub 0.
then if
l is bigger than m is bigger than or
equal to m
then
the absolute value of the sum
from n plus 1 to l
x sub n
this is less than or equal to the sum
from
n equals
n plus 1 to l of the absolute values of
x sub n
by the theorem we proved uh just a
minute ago
and this is less than epsilon by our
choice of m right m is equal to m0 and
for m0 we have
this inequality right here
okay
thus
this series is koshi which implies it
converges
all right so
basically the only test you know
for
determining
when a series is convergent is in one of
two
possibilities either a it has a very
simple form
and it's not so all the terms are not
non-negative but the terms have a very
simple form
it's the alternating series test which
will
discuss in a little bit possibly the
next lecture
and then when a series converges
absolutely
we have a lot of tests for that
we'll see that
series which converge absolutely
somehow are not fickle meaning i can
rearrange the terms
and the rearranged series will still
converge absolutely and converge to the
same thing that the original series
converged
to
so let me just uh make a brief comment
uh
after
this theorem we proved that absolute
convergence uh
implies usual convergence
and and tie in a little bit to what i
just said there so we'll show
that
the series
sum from
1 to infinity of minus 1 to the n 1 over
n
this converges
but
note
that this series does not converge
absolutely
right because when i take absolute
values i just get sum of one over n
which is the harmonic series which we
just showed a few minutes ago is
divergent
okay
so now we're going to move on to some
convergence tests
now when it comes to convergence tests
what these all follow from is basically
what we know about
geometric series
and the following comparison test
although when i do the proofs of the
other convergence tests i won't actually
state that i'm using the comparison test
but that's kind of what's really getting
used
so the first test we have
is comparison test
and the statement is the following
suppose for all
in a natural number
we're looking at non-negative terms
with one smaller than the other
then
the conclusion is
if the bigger one converges
this implies that the smaller one
converges
and
if the smaller one diverges
this implies that the
bigger one
diverges
okay
so
how we're going to prove this is okay so
we're dealing with terms that are
non-negative so we'll use this theorem
about
uh
a series of non-negative terms
all right so we use that theorem we
proved that a
series of non-negative terms converges
if and only if the
um
sequence of partial sums is bounded okay
so
if
this series converges
this implies that
the sequence of partial sums
is bounded
which implies that means
that there exists
something a non-negative number such
that
for all natural numbers m
sum from n equals 1 to m of y sub n is
less than or equal to b
all right
but this immediately implies that since
all the x ends
are less than or equal to the y ends we
get
that the nth
partial sum corresponding to
the x ends
which is less than or equal to
the m partial sum for the y ends
is also less than or equal to b for all
m
so
sequence of partial sums corresponding
to the x ends is bounded
and therefore by the theorem we proved
which i think i have erased already
um
the series converges
okay
now um
proving two is essentially
[Applause]
it's kind of the same thing except the
inequalities go the other way and the x
ends are getting bigger which implies
the y ends are also getting or the the
partial sums corresponding to the x ends
is getting bigger
implying that the partial sums
corresponding to the y ends are also
getting bigger so
now
two if
some
if this series diverges
then this implies that
partial sums
is unbounded
now prove that this implies that the
partial sums corresponding to the y ends
are unbounded
so
now remember what it means
for a sequence to be bounded is that
there exists a
non-negative number b such that for all
m i have that bound so to say it's
unbounded means that for all b there
exists a little m bigger than or equal
to capital n such that that inequality
is reversed
so let me put here in
a box what this actually means again
this means that
for all b bigger than or equal to zero
there exists a m
natural numbers so that
y n
equals 1 to m
is bigger than or equal to b
okay that's that's what
this means okay
so this is a for all statement so i have
to be able to prove it for every b
b b bigger than or equal to zero
now since
we know that
the partial sums corresponding to the x
ends
is unbounded
this implies that there exists
an m natural number
such that sum from n equals 1 to m
of x n is bigger than or equal to b
now um so let me
say again just
to show it's unbounded i should really
have so for a sequence to be unbounded i
should have an absolute value here is
bigger than or equal to b but all of
these terms is not negative or all of
these terms are are non-negative and
therefore uh i can remove the absolute
values
and the same thing here so
there exists a natural number m so that
i have this
and
so
let me put a little m0 there because we
have to somehow show there exists a
little m
choose m to be this m0 so now if we look
at the partial sums for the y ends
this is bigger than or equal to
because m equals m0
that's this term which is bigger than or
equal to b
thus this proves
partial sums corresponding to the y n
is
unbounded
and therefore
this series diverges
okay
so let's use um the comparison theorem
to
consider
series
um
like one over n p series and prove that
[Music]
proof when they do converge
so theorem
or p a real number
the sum n equals 1 to infinity
1 over n to the p
converges
if and only if
p is bigger than one
so
all right so for the proof
um
now why does the series converging imply
p has to be bigger than one
um
we'll do this by contradiction so
suppose
one over n to the p equals one to
infinity
converges
so
we'll do the proof by contradiction that
p has to be bigger than one
suppose p is less than or equal to one
then one over n to the p
when p is less than or equal to one this
is bigger than or equal to one over n
right
and this implies since one over n since
the series corresponding to one over n
diverges implies that the series
corresponding to one over n to the p
diverges by the comparison tests
which is a direct contradiction to what
we're assuming that
the series converges so
um
this must be false and p must be bigger
than one so we've shown that if this
series uh converges then p has to be
bigger than one so now let's prove the
other
let's prove the other direction
and suppose p is bigger than one
and prove that um
the p series one over n to the p
converges
so the way we're going to do this is
kind of how we
showed that the harmonic series is
divergent
so what we're going to do is first we're
going to show that there is a
subsequence of partial sums
corresponding to this guy that is
bounded so
remember to prove that this converges
this converges if and only if the
sequence of
partial sums is bounded okay and what
we're going to first do kind of towards
that is prove that there is a
subsequence of partial sums
which is bounded
so
let me make a
first
claim
that
the sequence of partial sum so
s
2 to the k
so this is sum from n equals 1 to 2 to
the k
of 1 over n to the p
so
all k a natural number
this partial sum
is bounded by a fixed number
depending on p 1 plus 1 minus
2 to the minus
p 1 is
p minus 1.
okay
in other words there's
this subsequence of partial sums
corresponding to s 2 to the k is bounded
so again we do this by
uh grouping these terms according to
which power of two the denominator is
between and then estimate from above now
rather than from below like we did for
the
harmonic series so
we have s two to the k
equals one so again we're grouping these
terms according to whether they're
um
where they fall
so this is
just write this out one more time this
is equal to 1 plus
half to the p
plus
1 over 3 to the p plus 1 over 4 to the p
1 over
5 to the p plus
1 over 8 to the p
plus
and then up until the the
last term okay
all right
and now i can write this as 1 plus the
sum from l equals 1 to k
so the number of blocks i have here
and then
now the terms that come in each of these
blocks
one over n to the p
okay
and
so now i estimate one over n not from
below by
this guy but from above by putting in
the smallest n uh
that n is in this block okay so this is
less than or equal to
one plus sum from l equals one to
k sum from
n equals 2 to the l minus 1
plus 1
2 to the l
1 over 2 to the l minus 1
plus 1
raised to the p power
now
this plus one is just making things
bigger on the bottom
so if i remove it i've made things
bigger overall for this fraction so this
is less than or equal to sum from 1
equals
l equals 1 to k
sum
n equals 2 to the l
minus 1
2 to the l times 1 over 2 to the
p times l minus 1.
and now this thing here
if we do the same algebra we did a
minute ago this is equal to 1
uh
l equals 1 to k
now i have this term uh coming out
and then the number of terms i have here
just like i did for the harmonic series
this is equal to 2 to the l minus two to
the l minus one plus one
plus one
and now this is equal to um
1 plus sum from
l equals 1 to k
and
so
this whole thing here is equal to two to
the l minus one so i get
two to the minus p minus one
l minus one
now i can shift this index
actually this this
um
so i guess i could have made that
sharper but it doesn't matter i could
shift this index l by
no okay so
l starts at one and goes to k
and here i have the sum l minus one so i
can shift this index
um
to go from
now l equals zero
to
k minus 1
2 to the minus p minus 1
l
okay i mean so i should have this is
like making a change of variables l
prime equals l minus 1
and
so let me put l prime instead of l
now this uh so p is bigger than one
okay so this is corresponds to a
geometric series now
so let me actually rewrite this as
1 over 2 to the p minus 1
to the l prime
okay when p is bigger than one then one
over two to the p minus one is less than
one
so
this thing is a k minus one partial sum
for the series geometric series with
this as r right so this is always
bounded above by
if i add up all the terms
which equals that thing that i have up
there 1 over
1 minus 2 to the minus
p minus 1.
okay
[Applause]
so that proves um
that
you know along this uh subsequence
these partial sums are bounded by this
fixed number
and now i claim
that this proves
that the whole sequence of partial sums
is bounded okay in fact by the same
number
for all m a natural number um
sm is less than or equal to this number
again 1 minus 2 to the minus
p minus 1.
okay
so
let m be a natural number so we're
trying to prove this bound what do we do
we
find a dyadic number of number of the
form 2 to the k
bigger than m
and
since 2 to the m is bigger than m i
think that's maybe one of the first
things we did
by induction
we get that
s to the m or s sub m which is the nth
partial sum of uh non-negative terms
this is going to be less than or equal
to since this is a monotone increasing
guy this is going to be less than or
equal to s to the 2 m
which is less than or equal to 1 plus
1 minus 2 to the minus
p minus 1.
okay
thus
the sequence of partial sums is bounded
which implies
uh
this series converges
and that's the end of the proof and i
think we'll stop there
you